---
title: The Two Sides of Computer Science Education
layout: post
description: >
  A retrospective on the good and bad parts of my computer science education.
keywords: computer science education hacsoc theory
---

People say that "hindsight is 20/20."  And to a point, they're right.  When you
look back at your past experiences, you see them clearer than you have before.
Typically, it's a bit reactionary; you emphasize the very bad parts and the very
good parts.  They play a much bigger role in the opinions you form as a result
of your life experiences.  This isn't good or bad itself, it's just part of how
you think of the past.

As a computer science student finishing up my fourth year (out of five), I'm
coming close to the point where I can look back on my education and try to put
it all together.  What have I learned from it?  Was my money worth it?  What
would I do differently?  How would I fix it if I had the power to change things?
Those who have read [other posts][why-cs-majors] on my blog may know that
computer science education is a topic near and dear to my heart.  And though I
have presented a few thoughts and opinions already, I feel like my prior writing
has danced around, but not completely spelled out, what I've learned in
reflecting on what's been good and bad in my computer science education.

**Computer science education has two parts: theory and practice.** This should
be no big surprise to anybody.  In fact, it sounds patently obvious when I write
it down.  But I really think I'm onto something important here, so please
indulge me for a bit!

Even though it's true that most major fields have both theory and practice,
computer science is different than most fields in that both are equally
accessible.  For many fields, you can learn theory online, in books, or in
classes.  There may be a cost to you, but it's usually fairly small.  But to
actually learn and experience the practice of the field, there is a much higher
cost.  You need equipment, materials, and time.  Internships and on-the-job
training are great for that, but they're nowhere near as easy to come by as
books and Wikipedia.  In computer science, on the other hand, the practical
world is just as accessible as the theory.  Just like you can look up
algorithms, data structures, and automata, you can also download industry-grade
programming languages, tools, and libraries -- completely free.

If you ask me, nurturing both the theory and the practice of computer science
*together* is the most critical part of computer science education.  But
frequently one of those two elements is lost in the balance.  Take, for example,
programming boot camps.  An accelerated course in programming can only hope to
teach someone enough to get writing code in a particular language and
environment.  Courses like these can't afford to go into the theory of computer
science.  So when they train a web application programmer, they won't teach that
programmer about the algorithms that power their tools, the math that secures
their app, or the intricate and fragile networks that connect it to its users.
If an education were to stop there (and, to be clear, many people *don't* stop
there), it would be woefully incomplete.

But that doesn't automatically make a university education like mine that much
better.  At my school, Case Western, we get a very theory-laden education.  In
the way of practical knowledge, we learn surprisingly little beyond how to
program Java.  Nowhere in our computer science core curriculum will you find
version control systems, basic use of Linux, or basic education on how to create
a web or mobile application.  To be clear, these things *aren't* computer
science theory, but they sure are important!  I would like to see them included
in every student's education, but not at the expense of the many equally
important elements of theory we learn in class.

Amazingly, here at Case we've found a way to rectify the lack of "practical
education" in a way that doesn't sacrifice the theory and fundamentals offered
in our classes: [Hacker Society][hacsoc].  CWRU's Hacker Society (or HacSoc for
short) is a group composed mainly of EECS students.  We meet weekly for
technical talks by current students, alumni, or even representatives from
companies.  Regardless of who presents, the talks are always technical in
nature, and they frequently are on topics in the "practical" side of computer
science.  Sometimes they are presentations about programming projects that
students have done.  Other times they are about technology that a company uses
internally.  We've even gotten fascinating talks from graduate students about
their research.

Perhaps most importantly, at the beginning of the year, we set aside a week or
two for fundamental talks that we dub "HacSoc Bootcamp."  In these talks, we
give introductions to things like using Linux, the command line, and version
control.  We even introduce people to programming languages and technologies
that we (as organizers and typically more advanced students) enjoy and know
well.  Later in the fall, we host a tech conference called Link-State where we
get speakers from far and wide to give a day's worth of practical talks.  And in
the spring, we host a Hackathon for students to throw their practical skills to
good use in a fun, competitive way.  And throughout the year we try our best to
maintain an open forum (actually, a mailing list) to answer questions and
connect curious people with the more experienced members of our group.

If these last few paragraphs have read something like a sales pitch for Hacker
Society, then you're probably reading them correctly!  I'm not trying to get you
to buy anything, but I really think that what we do is really great.  HacSoc
drastically improves the quality of our education beyond what classes alone do
for us, because it adds on the practical side of computer science.  So even when
I look back and see the bad parts of my education (courses that could have been
better, too few professors in the department, etc), I also look back and see the
bright spot that is Hacker Society: an amazing community education group.  So I
think that our model is something worth talking about, and maybe even spreading
to other places.

[why-cs-majors]: {% post_url 2015-08-30-why-you-should-hire-cs-majors %}
[hacsoc]: http://hacsoc.org
