---
layout: post
title: Confessions of a Geek
description: Uncomfortable truths about the way I've lived my life.
---

During spring break I had an odd experience.  I found all four of my high school
student ID cards, complete with my school picture from each year.  When I showed
them to a few friends, they all remarked on how little my face has changed since
then.  For reference, the picture I use on the front page of this website is a
high school senior picture, nearly four years old.  Not only do I look pretty
much the same now as I do in that picture, even my freshman year picture looks
about the same.  So over the course of seven or so years, it seems that my
appearance---or at least my face---hasn't changed that much.  Oh well.

Fast forward a week or so, and I've been doing a lot of thinking about an
entirely different subject: life goals.  As it turns out, I don't have a ton of
them.  Sure, I have the overall goal of pursuing a career in the field I love,
computer science.  And to achieve that, I'm getting a college degree.  But to be
quite honest, that's not a hard goal for me to have.  That's not to say that the
task of getting a degree is easy.  But for most of my life, going to college and
having a career has been a central part of how I imagine my life.  Computer
programming became such a passion of mine in high school that it was easy to
integrate into this vision.  So of course this is an easy life goal for me to
have.

Additionally, the task of achieving this goal doesn't really push me to improve
myself.  Throughout my life, academics have been easy to me, probably because
I'm a curious person, I like learning new things, and yes, probably due to some
amount of aptitude.  I'm no genius, and grades don't magically come to me
without effort.  But taking classes, learning course material, doing projects,
and taking exams are all routine for me.  I'm well equipped to achieve these
tasks.  I've been doing them for years, and while they still challenge me, they
don't push my boundaries or force me to improve myself.  Taking a look at my
life right now, I don't have goals that force me to do these things because,
let's be honest: *those things are uncomfortable.*

I guess I have at least one of those
[three great virtues of a programmer][virtues]: laziness.  In the task of
graduating and having a career, I've (at least subconsciously) made the judgment
that I don't need to improve myself too much to achieve my goal, and therefore,
to do so would be extra energy expended.  But that perspective is not OK.  The
more I've thought about it, the more I realize the horror of waking up some
morning in the future, looking at my old college student ID, and realizing that
I haven't changed since then.  Not realizing that my face looks the same, but
instead, realizing that I'm the same.  Still few life goals, still the same
flaws in my personality, health, skills, and discipline.  It's becoming clear to
me that my perspective has been wrong.  It's not about achieving a career with
the minimum energy expenditure.  It's about expending the greatest amount of
energy possible to make myself the best person I can be.

This probably sounds platitudinous and obvious.  And maybe it is.  But as the
result of some serious introspection, it means a lot more to me than just the
words.  I'm probably not the lazy lump I'm making myself out to be, but I'm
definitely at a plateau, and I've lost sight of what it means to improve myself.
Rather than subjecting my future self to that horrible realization of
stagnation, I'm changing my outlook now.  I'm setting goals and outlining
concrete changes I can make to my life right now.  Every decision should be made
with the question, "how will this help me achieve my goals?"  This isn't
something that will be simple, comfortable, or at all in my wheelhouse.  And
it's not a conclusion I should be congratulated for realizing---nothing has
happened yet.  I'll just have to rely on self-discipline, and the promise that
one day, time will prove me right.  One day, I'll look back on my college
student ID and be embarrassed about who I am now, because of the person I'll
have become by then.

[virtues]: http://threevirtues.com
