---
title: Public Mistakes are Cool
layout: post
---

Confession time: I'm vain. While I write a blog because I like to write and
share things, I'd be lying if I said that I didn't enjoy the occasional
publicity resulting from a successful post on Hacker News or Reddit. I get to
open up a Google Analytics tab and watch visitors enter my site. How cool is
that?

An interesting result of this is that I sometimes have the opportunity to read
Internet comments about my own work. As we all know, Internet comments can range
from wonderful, positive remarks (some of the time) to harshly critical, or
downright mean (somewhat more frequently). That's the nature of the beast, and
you quickly learn to have a thick skin.

Frequently, my articles feature mistakes. I'm only human, and I'm frequently
wrong. Besides just making a mistake within an article, I also occasionally
write articles about my mistakes (my [most recent one][bug], for example). Those
will inevitably attract more comments than others, because it's easy to
criticize a mistake.

This is really too bad though, because I think writing about your mistakes is
really valuable. People blog about their accomplishments all the time! I do it
plenty; it's fun to share your achievements! But emphasizing success and hiding
mistakes gives people an unrealistic idea of what the tech world is like. It
contributes to the Imposter Syndrome that many people in our industry feel.

A well written explanation of a mistake frequently reveals a technical
misunderstanding. If classrooms teach us nothing else, it's that lots of people
have the same question or misunderstanding, but are too afraid to raise their
hand. I learn the most from my mistakes, so it makes sense that other people
would learn a lot from them as well.

I would love to see more people write about their mistakes. Teach me what you
did wrong, so I can learn from it as well! Ignore the comments; if your mistake
is really that obvious to the commenters, it's probably because you did a good
job explaining it!

[bug]: {% post_url 2017-04-21-linked-lists-are-still-hard %}
